So, hey everyone. My name is Aparna. I'm
one of the founders at Arize. I lead up
the product team here and this is a
actually going to be a really fun
presentation. It's actually about an
agent that our team has built ourselves.
And instead of sharing kind of just some
of the best practices around evals and
debugging, I actually just wanted to
share some of the lessons we learned
along the way. Some of it was expected,
some of it really wasn't and hopefully
all of this is help useful to everyone
in this room who's kind of building
building an agent. Our entire product
has actually changed over the last year.
You used to have to go in, go figure out
a UI.
We now are completely agent-first. And
this agent that you're looking at on the
screen here is called Alex. User can
come in here and do all sorts of things
like say, "Hey, help me go trace my
agent. Help me go, you know,
um
I can go create a new chat and say,
"Hey, help me go try the playground,
build an evaluator." These are all
workflows that our agent actually
handles today. And we learned a lot in
actually building building this agent.
So, I'm going to walk you through a bit
of those lessons today. So, we're going
to talk about Alex and I'm going to
share a bit of the lessons that we
learned while we were building Alex. I'm
going to share some of the four lessons
we learned. One of them is about staying
on task, the other one's about context
management, next is about crystallizing
good behavior, and then the last is
about actually debugging a really good
agent. I showed you guys kind of in the
product what Alex was, which is our AI
engineering agent harness. This actually
has context about all of your traces. It
has context about your evals. It
understands your sessions. And it also
it has a whole harness underneath it
that does planning, has access to tool
calls and skills, and then memory that's
used across the sessions that people do
with Alex. We built tools to basically
help people build AI systems and we
thought, you know, we should probably
build an AI system and in the process of
doing that, we actually learned a lot.
Some of it was expected, some of it
wasn't expected, and hopefully you guys
get some lessons out of this that give
you a bit of a head start.
The first big lesson that we learned was
actually about staying on task. And this
is something every agent builder
actually hits. You ask the agent to do
three things, it does the first one, and
then it wanders off.
And in our case, we actually had a tool
called finish, but the agent would
always call that tool call before it was
actually finished. Like, you would give
it three different things to do, it
would finish one of them, get really,
really deep, and then it would just kind
of, you know, quit.
Um this is a real issue. And you know, I
can't really blame Alex because this is
what junior engineers do, too.
Um
but it's just not what we actually
wanted. And this actually happened in
our very first version of building Alex.
In one of the sessions, there's this
person that kicked off essentially 27
different tool calls with their
question. And it just did all these 27
different tool calls, but it didn't know
to come back and actually answer the
user's question.
So,
it went around in circles.
And you might ask, like, why is this
happening? It's not a hallucination
problem, it's not a capability problem,
it's actually an attention problem.
The model's context window um gets
filled up with all of the information in
that scenario, like with 27 different
tool calls, it got filled up, and it got
filled up with all the intermediate data
that was collected in order to answer
the question. So, the initial original
kind of user question just got lost
under pages of output. By the time the
agent actually had enough information to
be able to figure out what to do next,
it forgot what next was.
And so, the solution to this is actually
planning.
Um
the fix is to actually make the agent
write a plan before it does anything.
And
this is not a polite suggestion. It's
not something in the prompt that you're
like, "Hey, you know, try to do this.
You know, think about this ahead of
time." It is actually needs to be a
first-class
citizen. It's a first-class tool call.
And you guys know this, Cursor does
this. This is an example from Cursor,
Cloud Code does this. I mean, they all
have really good first call to do
objects. And what we did was actually
this is an image of Alex. We built a
really good uh to do or plan
every time that any user asked any
question. And we actually had three
separate to do to do's. Um
we had a to do write, we had a to do
update, and we also had a to do read.
Um
to do write actually kind of creates the
plan. To do update actually, you know,
changes the status of a task. So, if
you're midway through one step or
um you know, calling a specific LLM
call, it actually updates whether the
task was completed. And then to do read
actually fetches the current state.
These tasks also have states. So, you
can see here there's pending, there's
completed, there's blocked, there's also
in progress.
Surprisingly, in progress was actually
the one that we added later. And it
ended up actually becoming one of the
most important states
um that we learned. And this is because
when you have only pending and
completed, the agent doesn't actually
have any working pointer. It doesn't
know if it started a task or if it's
completed a task. It doesn't even know
what it's doing right now. And so, what
we did was especially for these type of
complex tasks, we actually, you know,
stuff that takes multiple turns to
actually solve, we actually added this
in progress that gave the agent a really
concrete anchor. This is my task. This
is what I'm doing.
Uh everything else can wait, but make
sure you finish this. And actually, you
know, in our evals, adding this in
progress was something that drastically
improved task completion rates. Another
big critical architectural decision. The
plan
is not stored in the conversation
history. So, how many of you guys have
an agent? You have the human
conversation where you're actually
interacting with the end user, and then
you also have your plan. Well, what
happens is that it's conflicting because
the agents now has the user messaging,
it has the plan, and it can get buried
or it can get truncated.
Um what we realized and what ended up
working for us is that we have to
reinject the plan into the context
window on every single LLM call. What
this did is that it dynamically
generated, you know, what the state was.
Um
we put it right after the system prompt
and before all of the entire noisy tool
call history. And this meant that no
matter how deep the agent actually got,
the plan was always right up front and
center. This is what the agent sees.
This is literally what the agent sees
actually. Um we call this the plan
message. And basically it tells the
agent exactly what to do next. Um it
tells it which tool call to make, which
LLM call to make, what to do after the
current task is finished.
Um and it's not just kind of displaying
the plan, it's actually coaching the
agent on what to do step-by-step. And we
learned a couple things actually in
this. One is that we needed to have this
thing called a finish gate. If the agent
tries to call the finish tool, but it
didn't finish some of the things on that
to-do list, it actually we threw an
error. It wasn't a suggestion, it
actually wasn't even a prompt. This was
actually a real error that was a
structured error message that lists,
"Hey, you didn't do these two other
steps."
Um
and it bounces the agent actually back
into the work loop. And we did this
because then the to-do list can live
outside of the context, it lives on the
disk. The agent can actually, even if it
tries to finish early, the system
actually won't let it.
Uh there's one big exception though,
which was actually um what we call the
blocks blocked status,
um which is if the human responds, so a
human jumps in and tries to add context,
um that's the only one where it's
actually pauses what it does and the
plan gets restored with the context that
gets injected.
So, this is all a really big
uh you know, one big lesson number one,
which is lessons from planning. If you
want agents to plan a rule, you know, I
think we're now at a point where it's no
longer, "Hey, the model's an issue, the
tool call's an issue." It's really
you're not guiding the agents in the way
that is convenient to them. You need to
put the rules in the code, you need to
put um um
not not just in the prompts, but you
actually need to put them in code. The
prompts are often suggestions, um but
you need to put real constraints for the
agents. So, for us the finish the finish
gate was actually one of that. Um we had
a lot of few-shot examples that actually
showed the agent what to do instead of
just telling the agent what to do. And
what this did was actually showed the
agent what really good planning was. So,
all of this was one really big lesson um
around a
major improvement in our agent's
performance. The second big lesson that
I'm going to talk about is context
management.
So,
what we learned was that the to-do plan
that was in our agent needs to live
somewhere that's really specific and
reliable
and can't be buried inside the
conversation history.
Because the conversation history can get
truncated, it can get Imagine, you know,
users store
you know, millions of spans in a rise,
they store hundreds of experiments. This
can all the plan can get truncated by
just or pushed out by just all the JSON
that is getting returned back. And so,
what we realized is that this needs its
own home, and we decided to give it its
own home.
Um this is how we learned the lesson
actually.
In the very early days of our agent, we
did I mean we took shortcuts. Like we
realized that um
if you tried to put two different
experiments inside of the system prompt,
one of the system one of the experiments
can have hundreds of rows. And so we
were like, well, let's just make sure it
never compares more than two experiments
at a time.
But
I mean users run thousands of
experiments in our product. And so
you know, we tried to solve this like
context overflow problem with a
band-aid. We just said, do less.
Um but that's not a real solution. It's
just giving up. Um and so what we did
was basically
um
we started to think about how cursor and
Claude code navigate through a large
code base. They don't just dump the
entire file into the context window.
They read a preview. They use grep to
actually find what they need. They read
just specific lines. I threw the
screenshot because it shows like plus 90
lines. Um and what's important about
this is that
you know, the file lives on the disk,
but the agent holds a reference to it.
And we realized that we actually needed
a pattern like that for handling large
data. So we built this abstraction. We
called it large JSON. Um
Don't tell us we're bad at naming, we
know.
Uh but when a tool returns a really
large data set, basically our agent Alex
doesn't just put all of that inside the
context. It stores the full data
server-side memory, and then it just
gives the LLM a preview.
Plus, you know, the ID to that large
JSON.
So that's a way to to handle kind of a
stable way for us to go and retrieve
that piece of data. So now what the
agent can do is
you know, it can read just the preview.
If it needs the entire large amount of
data, it has a way to go back and get
that. Um and so, it's it's basically
just like having a file name that you
can then go back and pull from disk.
Okay, cool. So, we did that.
But then we realized something else. I
mean, the obvious approach that we took
was just take the first, you know, 10
lines. Just take the first 100 lines. Um
and
and then, you know, obviously one line
can have hella tokens. So, we're like,
okay, let's be smart. Let's just take
the first end tokens and stop. But what
that did was actually it showed the
agent just a few complete rows, but with
no idea about the actual structure of
that data. So, what we decided to do was
actually, how do we compress the actual
value um but not the structure so that
the agent understands what the entire
JSON should look like. So, what we did,
um what Alex does, is it now it
compresses the values inside the JSON
JSON, um but not the structure. So, it
walks through the entire JSON tree and
it truncates every single value inside
of a cell to 100 characters max, which
means that every field, every key, every
array element um that appears in that
preview,
you know, except for like really long
strings, everything um ends up getting
truncated. But the agent ends up seeing
actually the full shape of the entire
data. And that's what you need to
actually write a useful query. So, we
empowered our agent with really small
composable tools. So, things like, yeah,
jq,
uh the same jq you'd use on the command
line, uh and grep JSON, which is just
regex search um over serialized data.
So, the agent can now write JQ
expressions to slice, filter, aggregate,
transform the data. And we also had some
kind of hard budget, something like no
tool call output can exceed 10,000
characters. Which meant that no matter
how large the actual underlying data
was, each query actually cost a
predictable amount of context.
Um and there was no overflow. You just
had to make sure go through extra turns
if it needed it. So, you're going to
hear me say this again and again, but
small composable tools is something we
we realized and it's it's not a new
idea. It's a really old idea. I mean,
JQ's old, grep is even older.
Um
but these tools are are really small.
They do one thing really really well and
you can compose them on top of each
other. They usually kind of accept, you
know, the input, they produce some
output, and basically this is all we
needed in order to make sure that our
agent handled context really really
well. Um
what this did was basically enable us to
manage infinite amount of context.
And you know, this was probably one of
the biggest takeaways for us because
before large JSON and, you know,
enabling these small composable tools,
every time a user wanted to go and, you
know, do analysis over 100 spans or
compare multiple experiments, we just we
just were in this problem of context
overflow. And we tried band-aid and
band-aid and band-aid limit the smaller
amount of data, but what we realized is
if we were just smart about how we
handled the data and and the agent could
ask for more information when it needed
it,
um
this basically,
you know, got us out of this like
context exploding dump problem we ended
up in.
So, now there's no limitation. You can
handle hundreds of experiments and our
agent can actually completely handle
that. So, these are some of the lessons
from kind of the the context management.
One is
hard token budgets on every tool output
that actually gets passed into the
context window.
Um compress values, not structure. The
agent should know what your data looks
like, but it doesn't need to have all
the text kind of, you know, shown to it
in order to be able to understand that
structure. This is an important one. Use
recoverable exceptions when creating the
the feedback loops. Basically,
um every time we got into this problem
where it failed, the tool call failed
because of some, you know, context
overflow, we started end up having these
ways for the agent to go back and learn,
"Hey, query a smaller and smaller piece
of data until, you know, you don't
overwhelm the context window." So, this
is a this was lesson number two. Lesson
number three is a really important one.
This is um
probably one of the hardest parts when
you're building an agent, which is how
do you test this?
Traditional software engineering tests
kind of assert deterministic behavior.
You have X, expect Y. Agents really
break that because your output is
non-deterministic. The same prompt can
produce different responses every single
run. And
all of those could be correct. So, you
can't just assert on exact text matches.
Um you can't even, and I know some
people do this, which is did it call the
right sequence of tool calls?
I mean
sometimes it might make an extra tool
call and it still gets to the right
answer. That doesn't mean that it's
necessarily wrong. Um so, it's not I I
personally don't think that asserting
the same sequence of tool calls is the
right thing um because some users might
ask a really complex question that asks
the agent to go through multiple tool
calls. I mean, this is where we started,
it's where everyone starts, right? Which
is vibe vibe checking, right? We watched
Alex, we eyeballed kind of the output.
Um Um, we we asked ourselves, "Does this
look right? And then we shipped. Um,
and then it doesn't scale. This is where
we started getting into all these
problems where we were realizing we were
just kind of dropping responses or not
able to handle big big data inputs.
Um, and this absolutely vibe checking
doesn't you know, run in CI and you you
just can't build a real production agent
with vibe checks. And so this is
something that we it was probably one of
our biggest key insight, which is don't
write expected inputs by hand. So,
you might know what you want your agent
to actually say or respond with, but
just let production actually tell you
what good looks like. When a user has a
really good session, then you know, when
when Alex actually does the right thing,
we literally just take that session and
we're we're like, "You're a golden
example. Like you are what we should be
trying to do." And those traces actually
give you everything. It's what the LM
did, it's what tool calls were called,
uh, in what order, and we basically
turned those traces into our ground
truth. Um, we didn't write it. A real
actually user and a real, um,
it's a it was a real instance of Alex
that was actually the ground truth.
Um, and then what we did was we took
that and we created levels of testing.
The first level of testing, we called
this like decision point tests.
Um,
and these are basically pie test based
um, they're they're they're pie tests
that basically validate very specific
agent decisions. For example, like if
you're building a message history up
until some kind of like decision point,
you we would actually run the actual
orchestrator and assert that this output
is correct. Like it has access to these
tool calls, these traces, uh, this is
the number of experiments. And we we had
flexible logic, right? So like, you
know, 2 seconds, 2,000 milliseconds.
Like, there's there's some flexibility,
but for the most part, it's pretty
deterministic. That's, you know, this is
awesome for when you're writing
code-based tests, you want to make sure
you're as deterministic as possible. The
second stage is actually when you start
getting into this idea of like
trajectory-level tests. This is where
you're measuring did the agent
accomplish the task in front of it. So,
entire sessions,
we would just extract them from the
production traces and replay it against
our code. Pull the trace,
extract basically what the user asked
for, replay it kind of row by row,
except in this case, it's like span by
span, to go through the the real
orchestrator, and we would score the
output of those results with an LLM
judge.
You know, did it you know, did it get to
the same place? Did it trigger the right
next step? Did it actually do a
different path this time? Try it with
different words and see if it actually
got to the right response, but um this
is this was a little bit more about
testing the trajectory of the entire
agent to see if it accomplished its
goal. And what we realized here was that
LLM as a judge was a really good way for
us to do this.
Um but the evaluation prompt that we
actually used mattered a lot. Um
and it needed to be kind of flexible
enough so that it can handle kind of all
the nuances.
And
this is this is maybe a really I can
give you some examples. Like, this is a
really subtle one that happened to us,
but we changed one of the tool calls
under the hood that our agent would
call. So, instead of like a you know,
get trace preview, we we named it to
something else like get traces. And when
that tool call got renamed, the agent
basically tried to call a function that
didn't exist, and it made this whole
runtime failure completely invisible if
you're just using like unit tests or if
you're stubbing data. Um and so, what we
started doing was actually we put this
into CI. Anytime anyone now makes a
change to our agent, there's experiments
in CI that run live.
Anything from a prompt to a tool call.
And Claude code review actually now runs
on every single PR with those validation
rules.
And this is great because it means that
somebody could change just a prompt
within Alex and we're essentially using,
you know, natural language to vet
natural language. To be honest, this is
the part that I kind of love. We get to
dog food our own product. We're an
eval's platform. Our entire test run
inside of arise and this is a way for us
to make sure that if we're able to bring
our own agent's performance up by doing
these type of CICD checks and evals and
it's pretty good validation that we're
we're on the right track. Here's some of
the lessons that we learned from kind of
this this lesson number three of
crystallizing behavior.
Build some infra to actually capture
your traces and your golden sessions.
Don't wait until, you know, you need to
really, you know, set something on fire
from from building tests. Run against
real APIs, not just mocks.
I think that this was this was kind of
one of the the big ones that we we
learned. This is my last lesson for you
guys, which is so, we've done planning,
we've got context management, and now we
have actually tests running in CI.
You deploy. Something goes wrong.
You're running an LLM in production. I
mean, something's going to go wrong. And
one of the things we learned is that
manual debugging is just really, really
hard.
A human's debugging Alex is opening up
arise. You might have some stuff that's
related to
um
code and that's in data dog and then you
might have something that never even
made it to data dog and that's in your
GCP logs. And it's just it's a very
tedious thing to debug because it's
often cross system, really, you know,
messy data to traverse. And this is
something that LLM's are actually very,
very good at. And this is something I
want to share with you guys which is a
bit of like
a change that we're all kind of going
through as an industry right now. Um of
how software gets built.
You know,
phase one which is kind of like software
1.0, this is the world that probably at
least I started engineering in, probably
the world that most of you guys grew up
in, which is a human writes code in an
IDE, the application runs, it emits some
telemetry, the human then goes reads
some dashboard and some logs and then
the human decides this is broken, this
is what I need to go do to deploy a fix.
Um but it's the human kind of completely
doing this. Right now, most of us are
probably in phase two, which is
um the human's kind of prompting a
coding agent inside of like cursor,
cloud code. Um the agent's writing code,
but the person who's probably still
looking at the observability data, still
the human. The human's reading the
dashboard, it's making hey, this is a
bug, and then it's actually using that
to um
you know, answer me
and then they go back to the agent and
use it to actually go fix code. I'm
actually really excited about where this
is going, which is phase three, where
this goes autonomous. The agent should
be able to have access to your
observability platforms. It should query
traces. It should have access to all of
that telemetry and it should honestly
implement the changes and then just let
the human know.
The human's role should really shift to
now being, you know, monitoring over the
system. And this is kind of my thesis,
which is observability platforms were
built for humans, all the like
dashboards, whatever,
the paradigm is now breaking when the
primary consumer of all of this
telemetry data is now an agent. Um
agents don't care about charts. They
don't really care about all the pretty
visualizations. They care about
structured data and they care about CLIs
and that interface layer has to evolve.
Um
and this is this is why um
you know, the source of truth is
actually shifting right now. When you
think about uh traditional software, and
this is actually Harrison Chase from
LangChain said this, and I think he's
actually really right. Um when you think
about kind of traditional software,
you can actually go through and read
every line of the code, and every path
that the code can take is really visible
to you. But here,
it's non-deterministic. You don't know
what the agent's going to do every time
it's making a decision. Which means that
you know, every single thing that
actually happens is logged inside of the
traces.
Um
and this has a direct implication for
coding agents. A coding agent can't just
look at your code and see what happened.
The coding agent actually needs
access to these traces to figure out
what is happening at runtime.
And it can figure out what the errors
are, it can figure out when there's tool
call loops that aren't working
correctly. And if it doesn't have access
to that, it actually can't do any of
this self-improvement loop that we all
want to kind of get to. The thesis is
give your agent access to your
observability telemetry stack. Um the
way this works for us, this is actually
what we do, is our entire Alex agent has
access to all of the data inside of our
platform. It has access to the traces,
it has access to the evals that are
running on the production traces, it has
access to the feedback. All of this is
accessible via our CLI,
um also as our skills, and essentially
that's the bridge between your
application your your coding agent being
able to debug and autonomously start to
improve your actual agent.
And so we're actually doing this today
internally, where the coding agent now
uses that data to figure out every time
a user hits an issue, we know it
happened because we're looking at the
traces. We can can automatically go put
up a fix, and we actually have a human
just review that fix, which is really,
really powerful. Um the skills it's
available actually today in case you
guys want to use it with your own coding
agent. All you have to do is just NPX
skills at arise, and basically like
these are some of the things that the
skills can do. It can just help you
instrument your entire agent. It can go
pull all of the spans of your agent,
surface up summaries, it can go help you
write evals, and the vision here is that
this is going to become the AI
engineering loop where your agent is
going to have access to all of your
data. It's going to observe it. It's
going to fetch the traces. It's going to
fetch the spans.
It's going to hypothesize. What should I
actually go do? Form a theory about all
the times your agent's giving your
application has some kind of bad
response. Your coding agent should
actually hypothesize why.
Uh it shouldn't guess from the code. It
shouldn't just, you know, guess from,
you know, console logs. It should
actually look at the traces, understand
what happened, and then it should
actually design and run experiments that
then get automatically logged, um and
and you can measure the outcomes. If
it's good, ship it. If it's not, go
back, try again. If you have logs in
other places, like in our world I was
saying that we actually have our data
inside of We have all the stuff that the
agent does, um you know, the agent's
perspective, all live inside of arise.
We do also have DataDog for all the
servers perspective. So this is all the
latencies, errors, HTTP status codes.
And then GCP actually stores our entire
infrastructure kind of perspective. So
anything that, you know, GRPC errors
that never even made it into as a span.
And so all of these we now have exposed
as skills as a loop. Um
and we just go ask our our agent go
figure out, hey, you know, Alex gave
this user a wrong answer,
uh and go figure out what went wrong,
and go go make an improvement. And it
goes through, it figures out what, you
know, what skills to call, and it
fetches all of the telemetry data, and
you know, we've caught a lot of things.
We've caught things like out of memory
issues. We've caught bad prompts. We've
caught things that weren't even related
to our agent. Um something that used to
take an engineer on our team maybe like
half of half an hour to go do, the
agent's probably able to do in like 2
minutes, which is which is really
awesome. Um
we do have to be, you know, mindful
about the skills that are exposed
though. We only gave skills that can do
safe things. So, we do have like wrapper
scripts around some of the more powerful
CLI calls.
Um
and you know, some of them do involve,
you know, asking for permission if it
really is um need needs that type of
guardrails. So, the TLDR from kind of
once you're in production, how do you
debug an actual agent? One, build
skills. They're low cost, high ROI. Uh
second, be smart about, you know, making
sure that the skills are have are
wrapped in something safe. And then
this is maybe the big meta thing, which
is debugging an agent is an agent-shaped
problem. Like, let an agent kind of do
what it's good at, um
and
debug itself. Like, let it sift through
the traces, let it sift through the
logs, let it go correlate IDs and
timestamps, and go down a procedure to
narrow down a root cause, and and and
the last one is, you might want to
invest in observability before you
actually think you need it. It's
incredibly cheap. You get visibility
into your agent, and it's probably going
to help you make sure that your agent
improves. So, these are some of the big
lessons. What does this all boil down
to? One is plan to not lose sight of the
goal. This is really important so that
your agent doesn't just forget
everything it learns. Second, you know,
it's almost counterintuitive to lesson
one, which is
but even though it gathers all that
context, make sure you only provide it
just enough context. You can always have
tool calls to you know, composable tools
to go get more. Three, when something
does go really well, like don't just
talk about the stuff where it's not
doing well. Like actually crystallize
the stuff that it does really well. And
then, I mean, it's production, it's
going to go bad. You might as well get
you ready to go and debug and have the
data and the tools ready to understand
how to make it better. These are maybe
two big themes of things we learned,
which is context engineering is
basically everything, how you handle
context. The second theme is just it's a
very weird but fun problem as software
engineers, you know, it's always very
deterministic systems, but we're all
probably handling non-determinism and
it's fun and a new type of challenge
that I think we're all trying to figure
out how to how to understand. So, thank
you guys so much for the time.
>> [music]